in a really fundamental way I think a
lot of people in the 21st century are
unprepared to talk about ethics in
making ethical claims we are often
making subjective claims we're talking
about who we are how we feel and our
judgments that ultimately involve
deciding to what extent other people are
good or bad definitely in my lifetime
the fashion has been to try to pretend
pretend that ethical differences don't
exist that religious differences don't
exist the model of the multi cultural
melting pot Western society was not a
model built on debate it wasn't built on
a Socratic ideal or even an Aristotelian
ideal of a society where people come
together and debate and decide in a
democratic forum what the future their
society was going to be no no especially
with the legacy of the British
parliamentary system and the legacy of
ultimately it's rooted in England's own
history of religious warfare of the
Catholics trying to kill the Protestants
and the Protestants trying to kill the
Catholics etc that the way to have a
multicultural society was to banish
these topics from public discourse was
to say who are you to judge me judgey
not lest ye be judged
nobody has an opinion people pretend
that religion is a private matter and of
course makes sense in some contexts at
the office you may not want your
co-workers to know what religion you are
and then want to keep it secret or what
have you you know is a certain set of
historical circumstances that produced
boundaries to public discourse and of
course with a really new idea like
veganism and for most of us it is new I
mean yes if you grew up a giant in India
if you grew up in Taiwan connected to
veganism as a minority movement within
Buddhism or something ok yes there are
some ancient roots for veganism in
ancient Greece to some of the ancient
Greek philosophers ignored for many
centuries but for the most part on 21st
century earth veganism is a new idea
it's a new challenge to receive wisdom
it's a challenge to all of the
assumptions about our lifestyle for the
vast majority of us it is a challenge to
exactly what our grandmothers told us
was good in life yeah
I've said before like learning that
alcohol is bad for you is a shock in
this same way to a lot of our culturally
preconceived deeply held notions so we
get into this realm of making ethical
claims and have ethical debates other
people that are judgmental that do
involve the questions of who is good and
who is bad who is sane and who is insane
who is right and who is wrong and I see
vegans kind of prevaricated
between the humility of having an
opinion and saying look this is just my
opinion I'm entitled to an opinion but
this is only my opinion and making
global claims that I would call
cosmological claims I'm gonna deal with
a few examples in this video for one
right off the bat you know I do not
drive a car I never have driven a car
but I do not make the claim that nobody
should drive a car and I do not take the
next step of saying anyone who does
drive a car is bad now whether or not I
would prefer to live in a society where
nobody drives a car is an interesting
debate to have it's not really
attainable or it's just not sailing into
the real world as we live in it so I
think it's a lot more meaningful to talk
in percentage terms would I like to live
in a society where there was 20% less
traffic or 50% less traffic and again
I'm saying this is relevant to veganism
terms of what's attainable living in a
100 percent vegan society is not an
option for most of us but what our
options really are what our goals really
are in the next few years are even more
important to talk about for that reason
everything I eat makes its way to the
store on a truck everything indirectly
everything I own
everything I need in my life has been on
and off of a truck so in a sense it
would be absurd for me to take my
combination of ethical and other
concerns that make me an t car cuz I am
you know it's fair to say of me I'm
basically someone who is against the car
culture and against car ownership in
German car as I'm trying to indicate I'm
not a maniac about it but those are my
values those have that fit in my life
but it would be ridiculous for me to say
nobody should own a car and I want to
add further here so currently I live in
a city even though it's a small city I
live in Victoria
in the west coast of Canada but back
when I was studying First Nations
languages out in Saskatchewan I
completely accepted that if I was gonna
stick with that program and get a PhD
and become a specialist in first nations
languages criative way those languages
possibly including east screen not just
plain screen I'd need a I need a truck I
will just see a car I would need a
pretty heavy-duty vehicle that could get
on to logging paths and forest roads and
rural roads in Canada I would need to
change my lifestyle quite fundamentally
because the people who still speak those
languages those languages are all in
danger of going extinct and any kind of
charity work or any kind of positive
work to make a difference involving
First Nations would require me to own a
car or truck of some kind so my point is
this is an example of an opinion of an
ethical and ecological argument I have
it's one that's part of my life and yet
I'm not expanding it into this kind of
global claim that anyone who disagrees
with me is evil or a scumbag or that the
whole world ought to play by my rules
and I'm even recognizing that in my life
there are exceptions to the rules
so to two examples I want to deal with
in this video I think it's very telling
to see the way vegans are struggling
with what I would call the anti-natal
list chic the sort of fad for people now
proudly proclaiming that they've decided
to have a vasectomy if they're male that
they've decided to never have kids
and I mean there are two very different
ways to approach that right it's one
thing to say with all due humility
that's subjectively and personally this
is my opinion I'm entitled to an opinion
but to say that you yourself do not
think you have what it takes to raise
kids that you don't think you could be a
good parent that's incredibly humbling
like really when you think about it
I think for many people it's it's
probably emotionally very hard to just
say that out loud to say I to say they
don't have what it takes to be a parent
I think I do by the way I have a
daughter who lives in France in Germany
and part of I open this channel is my
divorce and going to visit my daughter
and still an important part of my life
but it is one thing to say with all due
humility that you don't have what it
takes this is not for you and it's
another thing entirely to make a claim
on a global cosmological scale to try to
say nobody should have kids or anybody
who has kids is a bad person to make
this into a claim about how the world is
how the world works and about what
everybody should do and of course to
extend that into an ethical judgment
because if you decide that you yourself
cannot be a parent that is an ethical
judgment you're making on yourself and
you may be entirely right I have one
friend from way back in the day and he
had been in and out of psychiatric
hospitals when he was younger you know
he got his act together as an older man
and you know he appears to be mentally
stable maybe I'm wrong maybe if maybe if
he was my roommate I think he wasn't
that mentally stable but at a distance
you know he seems to have his life
together but you know at a pretty early
age he knew he would never have kids he
could never foster with the apparent
because he's someone who struggled with
mental health issues okay that's one
thing but if that guy now turns around
and says the things that so many vegans
are saying that you are a bad person
because you you can have kids
because you would or you do it's a
tremendous ethical difference that I
think people slide into without
realizing they're making the change and
say to me this is part of the breakdown
of what is it root a democratic ideal of
a society where people actually do
express and debate their ethical
differences that will involve questions
about the Catholic Church is it
acceptable for the Catholic Church to
control a separate school board that
teaches children the delusions of
Catholic doctrine from the moment
they're born is that okay or not still
in Canada we haven't settled this debate
is it acceptable in the 21st century to
have a separate school system for
atheists and Jews and Catholics and
Protestants and one where they're mixed
together is it acceptable to have a
separate school for rich people and poor
people this is not a minor or trivial
thing this is one that has profound
implications for society but say lifting
in Canada I live in a society that
cannot handle these debates at all where
there is no culture that can engage
these things where people instead grow
up being told don't don't ask about that
don't mention it and of course don't
judge so again I see people then playing
these games and maybe not realizing how
much is at stake maybe not realizing how
dangerous it is like here on YouTube
maybe not realizing that you're
alienating 90 percent of your audience
by buying into this this anti-natal list
chic this fad of proclaiming a proud you
out you got a vasectomy or something
without thinking about who the rest of
your audience is and your audience will
include people who've made terrible
sacrifices so they can have a child and
raise a child
and people who will regard you as
basically selfish and self-indulgent for
you know proclaiming your lifestyle this
way if your reason for not having kids
is because you want to live in luxury
and not have to plan what you're doing
this coming weekend and to be able to
just spontaneously pick up a bicycle or
swimming or go to the beach or go on
vacation and tile anytime it's not like
you're a doctor trying to find the cure
for cancer homeboy I've met people like
that too you can meet people who are so
devoted to their research or to their
charity work or to helping others and
making the world a better place that
that is the reason why they don't want
to have kids it's not so common not so
common as the other reasons for not
having kids but you know for those who
are just promoting the permanent
vacation yeah a life of self-indulgence
is not all that impressive a reason for
not having kids so look the other big
issue I want to apply this framework of
doubts to is something that's literally
been kicked around by unnatural vegan
and oh boy Tobias Tobias lee in art I've
responded to bias on this channel before
if you if you search within this channel
you'll find some videos with his name in
them um
[Music]
the overall question of should we be
cool with flexitarians there I've made
it sound tremendously intellectual
refined about putting that way what is
the advantage of having an
uncompromising more militant attitude to
war people who are softcore vegans semi
vegan flexitarian as opposed to
basically saying flexitarians are on our
side and embracing them at cetera and a
natural vegan has said some sort of
incoherent things about that lately
things I happen to disagree with and
again things I things I do think are
incoherent things that they're
incoherent in the sense of they're not
worked out into a program of action
they're not stated in a way that's
systematic or that thinks about the
implications for how we live and for
what veganism does in the next 10 years
as a movement or as a bunch of isolated
individuals
I just mean they're they're incoherent
in that sense don't mean she's she's
stuttering or or speaking poorly um now
this comes back to sort of the exact 180
degrees opposite side of what I was just
saying about antinatalism the
antinatalism I was encouraging people to
really
think about what it means to have an
opinion or for it to just be your own
opinion in contrast to making a
cosmological claim about this is what
the world is this is how the world works
and this is how my ethical standards
apply to everyone at the same time we've
got to be really confident in the first
part of that equation which is yeah you
know what this is my opinion these are
my ethical values and even though it's
just me it really matters to me and I'm
not gonna be mosy about you know being
honest about that I'm not gonna pretend
if I go to a party and I meet five
people and three of them are vegan and
two of them are flexitarian I don't
regard you equally I don't oh I may be
polite to all of you because I'm meeting
you all for the first time but you're
not equal to me you're not there's a
real ethical difference between people
were living a life of principle and
making that sacrifice and who are
committed and people who are not for
whatever combination of reasons I may
sympathize the reason I met someone here
in Victoria I'd say we're friends we
don't know each other that well but I'd
say we're friends so I have a friend
here and we we talk about animal rights
and what-have-you but she believes she
is too disorganized to be vegan and you
know um in the time I know her I've
known her she's she's lost the keys to
her apartment like twice she she lost
she's told me she lost her ID card like
seven times in the last two years used
the ID card to to ride the bus and to do
daily transactions here it's like well
you know like there are some hints like
she seems to me to be really sincere
when she's saying what you're saying
about animal rights and I don't know I
don't know about her excuses I've got an
open mind right now I'm listening but
yeah you know again my position it's not
that I'm a complete jerk to her or
something but I judge and I have my
opinion and I have my ethics and I'm
willing to be to be upfront with you
about it when I was involved
with humanitarian work in Southeast Asia
there would be different categories of
people doing humanitarian work sometimes
even when the work was exactly the same
work when it was the same job you could
have people who were profoundly
different coming from Europe to Asia to
do these things so break down what I'm
saying for you real quick like it was a
guy like me I was earning a local wage
and in many ways living in local poverty
I think I mentioned here before like
when I lived in the capital city of Laos
I earned $300 per month
u.s. dollars three hundred dollars per
month and even though Laos is a third
world country
it ain't that cheap you know you're
you're on the edge of poverty and if
anything goes wrong if you if I had to
actually go to the hospital or deal with
an emergency I had to take an airplane
flight you know taking a flight cost the
same for me as anyone else so $300 a
month is this is truly a charity level
salary and I'm living there locally and
I'm buying my mangos at the local market
with local people and meeting local
farmers and even like like the room I
was renting I wasn't living with rich
Westerners I was really living amongst
local people another category of people
you'd have people signed up with with
multinational conglomerates or
multinational charity sometimes
corporations so the charities who you
know we're receiving huge amounts of
money flying in and out looked like they
would fly back and forth between Europe
and and said these days you repeatedly
stay in a five-star hotel live in luxury
and be completely cut off from the
reality of daily life sometimes
including they'll be cut off from
reality in the communities they were
supposedly trying to help and the third
category was you would get vacation
volunteers people doing charity work but
like they fly over they basically do
this as part of a holiday and they would
literally like go from like get an
advantage like a village in Cambodia
where there were a ton of people dying
of AIDS and they're raising orphans
because the parents died of AIDS and
then the kids are still alive so you got
AIDS orphans and poverty in a village
and these people they fly in they spend
a couple hours of the day playing with
orphans you know doing this kind of
phony charity work and then they they go
to the discotheque at night you know
they're doing other tourist stuff and
this cinemas would be asking the
organizers of the charity like oh look
you know can you organise the day so
that you know we need a bus to take us
to the disco and like you know the other
stuff they're doing so again even though
they're there even though they're
physically there in that village for a
few hours obviously they don't speak the
language in many ways they're totally
disconnected from the reality and in
many ways they're still trying to go to
the beach to go to the disco do tourist
crap now when I was living in those
circumstance that was my social circle
those are the people around me who could
speak English other than that like in
Laos I would speak to local people and
the Lao language the most part and you
know I knew a couple of interesting Lao
people rebelling go but I mean this this
is really this is not a community these
are just the other people around me in
this society that I interact with um I
don't start from a globalizing claim
about who's good and who's evil I really
don't on a case-by-case basis you meet
people and some people are good some
people are bad most people are a mixture
of the two some people are doing the
right things for the wrong reasons some
people are doing the wrong things for
the right reasons and you could meet
people and learn what their motivations
were what their misconceptions were
before they came over what they're
trying to do and whether they're failing
to achieve their I learned a lot by
talking to people in all three
categories talking to the the deluded
millionaire executives guys living in
poverty as I was and again I was living
in poverty but of course there are local
people who are vastly more poor than I
am but still my own circumstances were
real poverty that's no joke but yeah of
course I can recognize my situation is
different from a guy who's actually
living his whole life on the rice farm
farming rice although the hey I wish I
owned the rice farm let me tell you they
have some advantages do they their lives
are not with their pleasure but sure you
could learn a lot from talking to all of
those people and I don't start
from any cosmological claim there's
division doing good and evil all these
people on this side all those people on
the other side but on the other hand I
have to say look I have an opinion I'm
here living this life I'm doing the
research I know what's going on I am
entitled to my opinion
my opinion counts at least for me and
it's good at count on this human level
of me dealing with you and me dealing
with this circle of 50 people or hundred
people yeah I'm not gonna pretend we're
all equal I'm not gonna pretend I don't
see the difference between you know a
guy who goes to the whorehouse and a guy
who doesn't
but among the guys who don't are you
know the crazy Christian missionaries so
again it's not simple it's like well
you're doing charity work I'm someone
who I drank zero alcohol I did zero
drugs I did not sleep with prostitutes
but the other guys in that category I
don't have much in common with em
because most of them are either
Christian or Muslim you know like that
you know the the moral scruples that I
apply to my life beyond veganism put me
in very strange company in those
circumstances one of the simple precepts
from Russia and nihilism identifies an
historical nihilist not as a Russian
nihilist but one of those simple
concepts was go to the poor be the poor
this is within Russia in terms of social
change and their point wasn't saying
don't have a protest in the streets of
the capital city and live in luxury
don't live as an intellectual cut off
from the reality of poverty actually go
to the poor be the poor live among if
you won't understand the poor and to
some extent my own methodology in life
did that embrace that and to some extent
of course I was always separate from
those people partly for these same
reasons the poor drink alcohol the poor
Gorder whorehouses the poor or eat meat
they do all kinds of things I don't do
and most of the poor if they got money
would live in a totally different way
from when I was living they wouldn't
work in a charity they'd buy a fancy
motorcycle and live in luxury and do
something else their lives so
it's not that I do this out of some
delusion of solidarity with the poor or
any any kind of left-wing delusion but
no I am NOT mosy about the fact that
there is a real difference between me
and a flexitarian and who I spend my
time with who I care about who I respect
who I organize with yes it's possible I
mean as with all these funny
contradictions it's possible you meet a
flexitarian and you end up really
respecting them I met a guy here and he
was one of my professors he had been
vegetarian in different times of his
life but then he became pescetarian and
the mercury content of the fish he was
eating in a pretty short span of time
totally destroyed his health totally he
had unbelievably horrible life-altering
permanent health damage because he went
from vegetarian to pescetarian no joke
and now he's on a crazy diet that
includes beef because his doctor was
giving them all these really specific
instructions and how to deal with his
his mercury poisoning you know it's
nothing it's the long-term consequence
of the mercury poisoning so you know you
mean a guy like that he was involved in
ecological and animal rights issues but
he eats meat of course I can recognize
there are some really unique problems
here and maybe you know maybe he's a
wonderful guy and what-have-you
I'm not just gonna sit there and judge
him in a shallow and catty way and I
don't know enough about the science of
his situation it sounds like he's in a
really tight situation where you know he
may not have any better options than
eating meat and some extent my heart
goes out to him but on the other hand no
I do not agree with this approach that
Tobias and a natural vegan endorsed I've
never heard her say it just recently a
natural vegan has been has been
endorsing Tobias on this of pretending
that there's any kind of moral
equivalence between someone who is vegan
and someone who's flexitarian no this is
a this is a hard line and again I would
say the same thing
you need someone who doesn't drink milk
just because they have an allergy well
you know it's quite common you meet
people who eat no dairy products just
because they have a health problem of
course that is different from someone
who's made the ethical decision of
looking at the horror of what
the dairy industry is and saying I will
not compromise I don't want this to be
part of my life I don't want this to be
part of the society I live in and I want
to get organized other people to bring
about some kind of social change so that
this ceases to be a daily reality on the
shelves of the grocery store next to
where I live and the farms just out of
sight just out of the reach of your ears
of cows living their whole lives
on a concrete floor inside a metal fence
being exploited from the moment they're
born until the moment they die in this
unconscionable way